docs/how-to/installation/configuration.adoc, before:

:page-id: how-to::installation::configuration
:page-parent: how-to::installation
:page-nav-title: Configure Pledger.io
:page-module: chapter
:page-title: How to configure Pledger.io after installation
:page-section: how-to-guides
:page-layout: section
:page-order: 4
:page-status: published

ifndef::document-root[:document-root: ../../]
include::../../_document-setup.adoc[]

{application} uses environment variables to configure the application.

== General configuration options

[%header,cols="1,2,1"]
|===

| Variable | Description | Default

| `DB_TYPE` | The type of database to use, allowed are `h2` or `mysql` | h2

|===

== MySQL configuration options

If the database type is set to `mysql` then the following environment variables are used.

[%header,cols="1,2,1"]
|===

| Variable | Description | Default

| `DATABASE_HOST` | The MySQL server host, only if `DB_TYPE` is mysql | localhost
| `DATABASE_SCHEMA` | The MySQL schema to use, only if `DB_TYPE` is mysql | fintrack
| `DATABASE_PASSWORD` | The MySQL user for authentication, only if `DB_TYPE` is mysql | fintrack

|===

== Mail configuration options

When using the mail feature of {application} the following environment variables are used.

[%header,cols="1,2,1"]
|===
| Variable | Description | Default

| `SMTP_HOST` | The SMTP server host | -
| `SMTP_USER` | The SMTP user for authentication | -
| `SMTP_PASSWORD` | The SMTP password for authentication | -

|===

[[configure_llm]]
== Large Language Model options

When either using the docker image `ghcr.io/pledger-io/amd64-embedded-llm` you can configure the following options.
Alternatively you can use the normal image but use link:https://platform.openai.com[OpenAI], at the cost of some privacy.

[%header,cols="1,2,1"]
|===
| Variable | Description | Default

| `AI_ENGINE` | The engine to use. Supported are `ollama` and `open-ai` | ollama
| `AI_MODEL` | The Ollama model to use, only used with AI_ENGINE 'ollama' | qwen2.5-coder:1.5b
| `AI_AUGMENTER_ENABLED` | Should the context for the LLM be expanded with budget, category and tag information | true
| `OPENAI_TOKEN` | The application token for OpenAI, must be set when AI_ENGINE is 'open-ai' | -

|===

NOTE: Please leave `AI_AUGMENTER_ENABLED` enabled with the default model.
This can be disabled when using larger models as they have a better understanding of the transaction information and tools.

Commit message:

Add release notes for 4.4.0, with newly added configuration options.

docs/how-to/installation/configuration.adoc, after:

:page-id: how-to::installation::configuration
:page-parent: how-to::installation
:page-nav-title: Configure Pledger.io
:page-module: chapter
:page-title: How to configure Pledger.io after installation
:page-section: how-to-guides
:page-layout: section
:page-order: 4
:page-status: published

ifndef::document-root[:document-root: ../../]
include::../../_document-setup.adoc[]

{application} uses environment variables to configure the application.

== General configuration options

[%header,cols="1,2,1"]
|===

| Variable | Description | Default

| `DB_TYPE` | The type of database to use, allowed are `h2` or `mysql` | h2

|===

== MySQL configuration options

If the database type is set to `mysql` then the following environment variables are used.

[%header,cols="1,2,1"]
|===

| Variable | Description | Default

| `DATABASE_HOST` | The MySQL server host, only if `DB_TYPE` is mysql | localhost
| `DATABASE_SCHEMA` | The MySQL schema to use, only if `DB_TYPE` is mysql | fintrack
| `DATABASE_PASSWORD` | The MySQL user for authentication, only if `DB_TYPE` is mysql | fintrack

|===

== Mail configuration options

When using the mail feature of {application} the following environment variables are used.

[%header,cols="1,2,1"]
|===
| Variable | Description | Default

| `SMTP_HOST` | The SMTP server host | -
| `SMTP_USER` | The SMTP user for authentication | -
| `SMTP_PASSWORD` | The SMTP password for authentication | -

|===

== OpenID configuration options

When you want ot enable OpenID connect in {application} you will have to configure the following settings.

[%header,cols="1,2,1"]
|===
| Variable | Description | Default

| `OPENID_URI` | The URI to the certificate location for the Realm in OpenID | -
| `OPENID_SECRET` | The secret for the client | -
| `OPENID_AUTHORITY` | The URI to the realm | -
| `OPENID_CLIENT` | The client identifier | pledger-io

|===

[[configure_llm]]
== Large Language Model options

When either using the docker image `ghcr.io/pledger-io/amd64-embedded-llm` you can configure the following options.
Alternatively you can use the normal image but use link:https://platform.openai.com[OpenAI], at the cost of some privacy.

[%header,cols="1,2,1"]
|===
| Variable | Description | Default

| `AI_ENGINE` | The engine to use. Supported are `ollama` and `open-ai` | ollama
| `AI_MODEL` | The Ollama model to use, only used with AI_ENGINE 'ollama' | qwen2.5-coder:1.5b
| `AI_AUGMENTER_ENABLED` | Should the context for the LLM be expanded with budget, category and tag information | true
| `OPENAI_TOKEN` | The application token for OpenAI, must be set when AI_ENGINE is 'open-ai' | -

|===

NOTE: Please leave `AI_AUGMENTER_ENABLED` enabled with the default model.
This can be disabled when using larger models as they have a better understanding of the transaction information and tools.
